Agricultural plant diseases identification: From traditional approach to deep learning
Abstract
Plant disease computerization in agriculture areas an important for every country, as the population rate increases the demand for food supply also increases. Today, the significant adaption of modern techniques and tools increases the accuracy of detection the plant disease. Identifying plant diseases in an early stage can reduce their spread. Early identifying is a beginning stage to fight against disease spreading. For plenty of years, researchers have researched how to tackle the common disease effects amongst humans, animals, and plants. However, there are still many gaps are remaining to identify and explore. In recent years, there have been many researchers using Deep Learning (DL) and Transfer Learning (TL) technologies to detect agricultural diseases based on Machine Learning (ML) algorithms that were developed with the development of Artificial Intelligence (AI) technology. Many, DL architectures are carried out together with numerous diverse visualization strategies to perceive and label the features of plant diseases. Our take a look at additionally makes a specialty of how ML strategies had been moved from conventional ML to DL and additionally numerous overall performance metrics (F1-score, sensitivity, accuracy, etc) are used for the assessment of the architecture/strategies. Some challenges are figure out while identifying the plant disease detection.
Introduction
Plant diseases identity is a high studies content material with inside the subject of system imaginative and prescient. It is a generation that makes use of system imaginative and prescient technique/method/gear to seize pix to determine whether or not there are sicknesses with inside the gathered plant pix [1]. The prevalence of the disease contains a poor effect on agriculture production. If the plant diseases do not appear to be recognized early time, meals scarcity can increase [2]. In latest years, disorder identity has been a decisive issue. Early diagnose is that the preliminary foundation steps for powerful difficulty and management of plant diseases, and they play an extreme position in the control of agriculture production [1], [2].
Generally, each disease represents a uniquely visible pattern that can diagnose abnormal. Usually, an infected plant can show clear marks or lesions on flowers, fruits, seeds, or stems. The Primary source of identifying the diseases on plants is leaves, and most of the symptoms appear on leaves (Zhang et al., 2021).
Based on experience, the farmers can identify the disease, or agriculture experts identify on-site. Economic losses increase when farmers blindly pesticides during the disease identification process on leaves [3]. To tackle these challenges, plant disease identification with image processing methods is a hot research topic.
The disease identity method in a conventional manner is proven with inside Fig. 1. Dubey et al. [3] selected 3 types of apple diseases (apple scab, apple rot, and apple blotch disease) as research objects. The region of the lesion in the fruit apple was identified by K-means clustering algorithm. Pattern (CLBP), color coherence vector (CCV), local binary pattern (LBP), and global color histogram (GCH) were recognized and identified with an accuracy of 93% on a Multiclass Support Vector Machine (SVM). Singh et al. [4] used the K-means clustering with Genetic Algorithm (GA). To set unlabeled points in different dimensions in different clusters GA was used with color co-occurrence feature extraction method. Here Local homogeneity, contrast, cluster shade, energy, and cluster prominence are computed for image. GA is used in K-means and Support Vector Machine (SVM). Four disease samples are used banana, beans, lemon, rose, and with the proposed Minimum Disease Criterion (MDC) algorithm the accuracy was 93.63% and SVM with proposed algorithm accuracy reached 95.71%.
Chai et al. (2010) selected 4 kinds of tomato foliage diseases (leaf spot, early blight, leaf mold, late blight) and extracted 18 features characteristics such as color, texture, shape. Using discriminant analysis combined with bayes discriminant analysis and component analysis combined with Fisher discriminant models. Accuracy 94.71% and 98.32% reached with two methods Bayes discriminant function and principal component analysis.
Devi et al. [5] use a Support Vector Machine (SVM), K-means clustering, and Grey Level Co-occurrence Matrix (GLCM) to identify paddy leaf diseases. K-means clustering forms a group cluster of paddy leaf images. Texture feature extraction is done through GLCM, and for classification, both linear and non-linear data SVM is used. Four diseases (Bacterial, fungal, viral, and mosaic) are detected and recognized with accuracy of 98.63%.
Maity et al. [6] efficiently addressed plant disease identification. With the help of image processing, Leaf diseases were identified and processed. To identify the faulty region in a leaf, K-means clustering and Otsu's technique were used to take proper action. They have segmented the leaf images and classified them into faulty and normal regions.
Li and He (2018) to classify and identify the apple leaf diseases, Back Propagation (BP) neural network models were used. Addresses (round spot disease, speckled deciduous disease, mosaic disease, yellow leaf disease, and rust disease) 5 different kinds of diseases on an apple leaf. 92.6% average recognition accuracy reached.
The detection of plant diseases by traditional image processing techniques has given certain results with high precision in the identification of diseases, but the following obstacles and limitations remain:
* 1)
Identifying diseases through the traditional approach is a time-consuming process.
* 2)
High quality of input image required to get better accuracy.
* 3)
Continuous police work is important to diagnose the first diagnosing of the malady and forestall the unfold of the malady.
* 4)
High cost of setting up the lab to test the results, lab tests are ruinous since collecting plant samples and bringing them to the lab for testing/analysis. In addition, shipping costs are required to send the samples to the laboratory.
Therefore, it is now to change the approach from traditional learning to deep learning to realize smart, fast, and clear-cut plant leaf disease recognition.
Literature review
In recent years, face recognition [9], text detection (Li et al., 2016), traffic identification (Yang et al., 2020), medical image recognition [7], [8], expression recognition (Li et al., 2016), etc are some application of deep learning model. Various plant disease detection techniques related to deep learning are used in agricultural implements. Eliminate the traditional image recognition approach for identifying plant disease regions, feature extraction (texture, color, etc.), and
Without visualization methods
In [14], three different types of maize leaf diseases were identified such as northern corn leaf blight (Exserohilum), common rust (Puccinia sorghi), and gray leaf spot (Cercospora), and the results are shown with the histogram techniques. In [15], tomato leaf diseases were identified using two optimizer techniques, stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and Adam with the CNN architecture like AlexNet, GooLeNet, and ResNet. ResNet with SGD optimizer performs well with 96.51% accuracy. In [16], the
Plant datasets
Plant Village is an open-source dataset available on Kaggle. The images contain a detailed description of the leaves before and after diseases affect them. In Kaggle, the Plant Village, a dataset open to the public, has now collected 54,309 images of lava plant diseases, contains 14 types of vegetables and fruits, such as apples, grapes, soybeans, apples, tomato, and corn contains total 26 diseases out of that 17 types of fungal diseases, 4 types of viral diseases and 1 type of diseases caused
Challenges
   * (1)
Small size problem in dataset
Deep learning methods are becoming more popular in various fields such as medical, computer vision tasks, and plant diseases. There are few sample leaf images for specific plant infections. A large portion of the dataset requires most of the deep learning models at the time of training due to an adequate number of images. Self-collected data sets are small and take a long time to label the data. To make the algorithms more practical, real-time images to collect.
Conclusion and future direction
This document explains the path from traditional techniques to a deep learning approach to the detection/identification of plant diseases. A large data set on plant diseases is required when training the DL model for greater accuracy. The value of collecting large highly dispersed data sets, augmenting the data, and displaying CNN activation maps for classification accuracy. To identify the exact location of disease on leaf CNN visualization can help to locate better. In addition, many
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing interests: [Mr. Jameer Kotwal reports was provided by Amity University Chhattisgarh. Mr. Jameer Kotwal reports was provided by Amity University Chhattisgarh. Mr. Jameer Kotwal reports a relationship with Amity University Chhattisgarh that includes:. Mr. Jameer Kotwal has patent licensed to Licensee. Dr. Ramgopal Kashyap Amity University Chhattisgarh Dr. Shafi Pathan World
Mr.Jameer Kotwal, completed M.E from Pune University and pursuing PhD from Amity university Chhattisgarh. Her area of Research is deep learning and has teaching experience of 14 years (Pimpri Chinchwad College Of Engg. and research). He got fund from NVIDIA company. Published papers in National and International journals.