Diseases of Shoot, Stem and Root on Eucalyptus pellita F.Muell. at Sebulu, East Kalimantan

ABSTRACT This study aimed to determine the symptoms and signs of diseases on the shoot, stem, root, the causal agent, and the disease’s incidence  and  severity. The most resistant families and the most detrimental pathogen were also discussed. The study was conducted at Surya Hutani Jaya Concession, Sebulu in Kutai Regency, East Kalimantan Province, and continued  to  identify  the  pathogen  in  the  Laboratory  of  Forest  Protection,  Faculty  of  Forestry,  University  of Mulawarman. The study’s object was E. pellita progeny test of 6 years old, with a spacing of 3 m  2 m, and at the nursery. The  seed was originated from  the clone of  Riau (Sumatera). The study revealed that  there was a  dieback disease  caused  by  Botryosphaeria  sp.,  stem  canker  by  Coryneum  sp.,  root  rot  by  Ganoderma  sp.  and  termite Coptotermes sp. at the plantation, while at the nursery was found damping-off caused by Fusarium sp., leaf feeders of locust  Atractomorpha  crenulata  and  leaf  roller  caused  by  caterpillar  Strepsicrates  sp.  The  incidence of  dieback disease at plantation ranged from 79.2% to 6.3%, stem canker was only one tree (47.9%), root rot was also only one tree (46.8%), and termite attack ranged from 70.8% to  39.6%. The severity of dieback disease at plantation ranged from 22.2% to 4.2%, stem canker 1.4%, root rot 2.8%, and termite attack ranged from 4.2% to 1.4%. Keywords: Eucalyptus pellita, Shoot, Stem, Root  1. INTRODUCTION Eucalyptus  pellita  F.Muell.  (family  Myrtaceae)  is one  of  the  species  that  is  prioritized  in  industrial plantation forest,  because of  its adaptability to  its new habitat and  the wood can be used  for raw materials of pulp  and  paper.  The  development  of  this  species  in Kalimantan  and  Sumatera has  shown  good growth  of the stem shape, growth speed, high wood quality, and have high sprouting ability [1]. This species can also be used  for  building construction  materials  and has  long been used for materials in the charcoal industry in Brazil [2]. The species is often planted in monoculture, so it is often  susceptible  to  disease.  Given  the  widespread expansion of E. pellita in Kalimantan in general and in East Kalimantan in particular, more intensive research is needed.  Because  the  wood  is  precious  and  in  an extensive area, even a small decrease in increment needs to  be  prevented  from  experiencing  losses.  Decreased increments  can  be  caused  by  pathogens,  both  from biotic and abiotic factors.  Old  et al.  [3] stated  that many  types of  diseases attack  Eucalyptus  spp.  from  the level  of  seedlings  to trees and from roots to leaves;  most of  the causes  are fungi. For example, in a crop, 13-month-old E. pellita in northern  Queensland  in  1996  was  attacked  by  a bacterium  Ralstonia  solanacearum,  resulting  in  many plants  experiencing  leaf  wilting.  In  plantations  near Pekanbaru (Sumatera),  Ganoderma attacks the roots  of E. pellita trees and causes death. Black mildew caused by the fungus Meliola densa also attacked a hybrid of E. pellita  E.  brassiana  in  a  trial  of  provenance  and family effect in Melville Island (north of Australia), but this species was resistant to leaf rust disease caused by Puccinia  psidii.  In  Queensland  and  Vietnam,  this species  is  also  known  to  be  resistant  to  leaf  blight caused  by  Calonectria  reteaudii,  stem  canker  of Cryphonectria  cubensis,  and  Cryptosporiopsis eucalypti.  Arsensi  and  Mardji  [4]  had  reported  leaf diseases on E. pellita in Surya Hutani Jaya Concession. Eucalyptus species most resistant to leaf blight is E. grandis  E. pellita and the most virulence of leaf blight is Cylindrocladium sp. against  E. grandis  E.  pellita. Advances in Biological Sciences Research, volume 11Proceedings of the Joint Symposium on Tropical Studies (JSTS-19)Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Atlantis Press B.V.This is an open access article distributed under the CC BY-NC 4.0 license -http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/. 186
    Botryosphaeria  appendiculata  fungi  cause  dieback (dead  shoots)  on  E.  pellita  found  in  Melville  Island, Australia. According to  Harding et  al. [5]  E. pellita is susceptible to stem borer Lyctus brunneus. Currently,  in PT  Surya Hutani  Jaya Company  (PT SHJ)  at  Sebulu  is  being  developed  E.  pellita  which comes from selected seeds and clones called family. The selection is intended to produce superior families so that the wood productivity increases to meet the shortage of raw  materials  for the  pulp and  paper industry.  To  get these superior families, PT SHJ has built E. pellita test plant  known  as  Progeny  Full  Test  Sib,  in  which  the plant material comes from seeds of known both parents (male and  female) as  wide as  14.4 ha  in Sumatera.  To find  out  the  advantages  of  the  trees,  the  company deliberately does not maintain this area. Later, trees can be  produced  by  trees  (families)  that  excel  in productivity and resistance to pests and diseases. This study was conducted to find out the symptoms and signs of shoot, stem and root disease in E. pellita in the progeny test and nursery area; the causal pathogens; incidence and severity of pathogenic attacks; the family which is the most resistant; species of diseases that are potentially the most detrimental. 2. METHOD 2.1. Location and Fieldworks Fieldwork  was  conducted  in  PT  SHJ  at  Sebulu, Kutai Regency, East Kalimantan. Fieldwork was carried out  from  November  2012  until  November  2013  and continued with the research in the Laboratory of Forest Protection,  Faculty  of  Forestry,  the  University  of Mulawarman in Samarinda. The research object was E. pellita of 6 years old in the progeny test  area of block 35A, zone 34, consisting of 30 families, clone origin of Riau. The trees in the sub-plot were 12 trees, replicated six  times,  so  the  sum  of  trees  was  30  families   6 replicated  12 trees = 2160 trees. Plant spacing was 3 m  2 m, the large subplot was 72 m2.  Data collected in the field were symptoms and signs of pathogenic attack, total diseased and alive trees. The severity of the pathogen attack was determined based on tree conditions modified from Mardji [6] (Table 1).   Table 1. Determine the score attack of pathogens on each tree of E. pellita  Identifying  disease-causing  microorganisms  was done by attaching  the adhesive tape to the trunk or the upper  and  lower  of  affected  leaves,  embedded  in  an object-glass, and then examined with Nikon’s binocular microscope UFX. Literature used  for the identification of  pathogens  were  “Illustrated  genera  of  imperfect fungi”  by  Barnett  and  Hunter  [7]  and  “A  manual  of diseases of  eucalypts in south-east Asia”  by Old  et al. [3].  Symptoms  and  signs of  the  attack  were explained qualitatively.  Disease  incidence  (I)  was  calculated  by comparing  the  number  of  trees  attacked  by  the  total number of observed trees in terms of percent according to James [8] as follows: I = (n/N)  100%. Where  n = number  of  diseased  and  dead  trees.  N  =  number  of observed  trees.  Disease  severity  (S)  was  calculated using a modified formula of de Guzman [10], Singh and Mishra [11] as follows:  S = {(X1Y1 + X2Y2 + X3Y3 + X4Y4) / XY4}  100% Where X = number of observed trees. X1 = number of trees  having a  score  1.  X2 =  number of  trees having score  2. X3  = number  of  trees having  score 3.  X4 = number of trees having score 4. Y1 to Y4 = score of 1 to 4.  To  determine  the  condition  of  stand  and  level  of resistance of each family of E. pellita against disease are shown in Table 2. Condition of tree Score Healthy: no symptoms of attack or presence, but the number of affected leaves are very few compared to the total number of leaves; the canopy is very lush to thick. 0 Light attack: the number of leaves and number of attacks on each of the affected leaves is few or loss or chlorotic leaves is few or plant looks healthy, but there are other symptoms such as stem canker, the canopy is lush to rare. 1 Moderately attack: the number of leaves and number of attacks on each of the affected leaves rather a lot or loss or chlorotic leaves rather a lot or is accompanied by other symptoms such as stems canker, the canopy is rather sparse. 2 Severe attack: the number of leaves and number of attacks on each of the affected leaves is many or many leaves are fall or many chlorosis or are accompanied by other symptoms such as stem canker, canopy is rare. 3 Dead: entire leaf wilting or loss or no signs of life 4 Advances in Biological Sciences Research, volume 11187
   Table 2. Stand condition and resistance level of each family of E. pellita to disease The severity of disease (%) Stands condition Resistance level 0 – 1 Healthy (H) Highly resistant (HR) >1 – 25 Low damaged (LD) Resistance (R) >25 – 50 Moderately damaged (MD) Somewhat resistant (SR) >50 – 75 Heavy damaged (HD) Vulnerable (V) >75 – 100 Very heavy damaged (VHD) Highly susceptible (HS)  3. RESULT AND DISCUSSION 3.1. Incidence and Severity of Pathogen Attack in Progeny Test Area Death  symptoms  indicate  dieback  disease  in  the shoot section followed by branch death, twigs, and  the entire canopy’s death. The infection spreads to the base, so  the  main  stem  dies,  but  the  surviving  stems sometimes  grow  new  shoots,  which  cannot  last  long because  the pathogens  continue  to spread  towards  the stem’s base so that all parts of the tree die. The healthy wood  part  is  white,  bordering  with  the  infected  one, dark brown if  the dead  bark is  peeled. The cause  is a fungus Botryosphaeria sp. The fungus spores are round to oblong,  light brown to  dark in colour, consisting of one cell and a nucleus inside. This disease  is the  most widely  found at the study site.  The  highest average  incidence  of  attacks was  in family  Ep24  (79.2%)  and  the  lowest  in  family  Ep28 (6.3%).  The  highest  average  of  severity  was  in  the family Ep19,  and Ep21  (22.2%, respectively), and  the lowest was in the family Ep30 (4.2%). There were 17 families whose incidence of dieback disease is above 50%, while 13 families with a severity below 50%. The severity of all families was below 25%. The stand at the study site could be categorized as low damage; the resistance level of the stand was resistant to dieback disease. 3.2. Climate Conditions 3.2.1. Stem Canker Stem canker is damage that  occurs on  the stem  of the plant.  This disease  is very detrimental because the wood  structure is  damaged,  and in  severe attacks,  the wood cannot be  used. The  cause of stem canker in  E. pellita in the progeny test area was a fungus Coryneum sp.  The  spores are  dark,  consisting of  several  oblong round  cells with  a slightly  tapered  tip. The  symptoms are opened bark and  visible part of the wood,  which is limited by callus. The thick sap comes out of the opened bark, and the canker extends from the base of the stem to  the  top;  the  tree’s  growth  is  not  good;  under  the infection,  sometimes  new  buds  grow  (epicormic branches).  The tree damaged by stem canker may be caused by injury to  the stem followed by pathogens’  entry.  Stem canker pathogens are more active in high rainfall areas, where there are many susceptible plants [3]. The causes of stem canker, in general, are fungi of various species. Tree species of E. pellita is moderately resistant to the stem canker Cryphonectria cubensis, but the sapwood is susceptible to attack by Lyctus borers [9]. Stem  canker  was  just  found  in  family  Ep14.  The average  stem  canker  incidence  was  47.9%,  and  the average  severity  was  1.4%.  The  incidence  of  stem canker disease was less than 50%, and the severity was less than 25%, so that the condition of the stand in the study  site  was  categorized  as  low  damaged  with resistance levels was resistant. 3.2.2. Root Rot The part of the tree attacked is the base of the stem and roots, the base of the stem is rot and easy to fall, on the bark of the stem base is dark in color, the leaves turn yellow,  and  fall, branches,  and  twigs  die,  so the  tree becomes bare. There  are fine white threads  that, when moistened turn yellowish, a fruit body is growing on the stem’s  base.  The  fruit  body’s  shape  is  like  a  fan, semicircular,  hard,  woody,  and  the  bottom  surface  is white; the upper middle is dark brown and can reach a size of 40 cm. The cause is a fungus Ganoderma sp.  Root  rot is  a  disease that  spreads  through the  soil (soil-borne  disease)  through  contact  between  healthy plant roots with the source of diseased inoculum; in this Advances in Biological Sciences Research, volume 11188
    case, the inoculum source  can be stumped, dead roots that have been attacked by root rot pathogen. When this study  was carried  out,  many former  Acacia mangium dead stumps  might  be caused  by Ganoderma  sp. This transmission can  occur due to  contact between healthy E. pellita roots with the remnants of the infected roots of A. mangium in the  soil. According  to Boyce  [10] root rot  may  be  caused  by  various  Ganoderma  species (Ganoderma spp.), which is very  damaging, especially in tropical areas where natural forests are converted into plantations extensively. Agustini et al. [11] reported that root rot in E. pellita at PT Arara Abadi (Sumatera) was caused by G. philippii and Phellinus noxius. Root  rot  found  in  E.  pellita  is  very  detrimental because it causes tree death since infected roots cannot function properly as it is known that the roots play a role in  supporting  the  establishment  of  trees. Physiologically,  the  root  is  one  of  the  plant’s  vital organs because  it functions as  an absorber of nutrients and water for the plant’s growth and development. Root rot disease  was just  found in the family Ep11 with an incidence  of  45.8% and  the severity  of 2.8%, then  the  stand  of  E.  pellita  in  the  progeny  test  was categorized as low damaged in the level of resistance. The incidence of root rot disease was less than 50%, and the severity was less than 25%, so that the condition of  the stand  in  the  study site  was  categorized  as low damaged with resistance levels was resistant.  3.2.3. Stem and Root Damage A species of termite caused damage of the stem and root  on  E.  pellita  trees  in  progeny  test,  namely Coptotermes sp. The trunk is covered with soil groove starting from the stem’s base up to the tree’s height. The attack is to circle  the stem, and there is  also a  straight groove  up.  If  the  soil  is  dismantled,  there  are  many holes in the trunk where termites present. The hole size is 1 to 2 mm. The soil protects termites from parasites, predators, and physical  factors such as  rain, wind, and light.  The  hole  size  is  1  to  2  mm.  The  soil  protects termites from  parasites, predators,  and physical factors such as rain, wind, and light. At first glance,  termites are  small insects  similar to ants  found in  many  places, in  forests, yards,  gardens, and even inside homes. Termite nests are found in damp places  in the  soil and  wet  logs,  but some  live in  dry wood.  The  main  foods  are  wood  and  other  cellulose materials,  and  fungi  [12].  Termites  taxonomically grouped into the order Isoptera (iso = equal and ptera = wing).  Termites  have  soft,  light-colored  bodies.  The number  of  termite  species  globally  is  about  2,648 species  classified into  seven families  and 281  genera. Coptotermes sp. is  including one of the termites of the family Rhinotermitidae [13]. Soil termites  are a group  of termites that  cause the most economic losses. Genera  Coptotermes is the most termite that  damages wood  and other woody materials on the soil. According  to Tarumingkeng [14].  The soil termite has the highest attack power, and even the attack can  reach  the  26th  floor  of  a  multi-storey  building. Coptotermes  sp.  may  found  in  many  tropical  and subtropical regions, with 45% of its species found in the tropics.  In  central  Sumatera,  it  is  reported  that  the termite damaged one-year-old Acacia sp. as large as 10-50% [15]. Subterranean termites enter wood through the soil or the protective passageways. This termite species require  specific  humidity  regularly  [16].  The temperature range preferred by termites is 21.126.7C and optimum humidity is 9598% [17]. When this study was  conducted, it  had  entered  the rainy  season  where the  average  rainy  day  was  ten  days/month  with  an average  rainfall  of  194.5  mm/month.  According  to Schmidt and Ferguson, the value is above average when connected  between  the  average  in  the  field  and  the average rainfall classification, so it is possible for  high termite  attack  rates  because  of  the  environmental conditions that support them for breeding. The  highest  average  termite  incidence  was  in  the families  Ep3 and  Ep26 (70.8%)  and the  lowest in the family  Ep16  (39.6%).  The  highest  average  termite severity was  in the family Ep4  (4.2%), and  the lowest was  in  families  Ep7,  Ep16,  Ep18,  Ep22,  and  Ep26 (1.4%, respectively). Termite attacks were not so much found in the study site; there  were only found in 9  families, where  seven families had an incidence above 50% and two families with  a  severity  less  than  50%.  The  severity  in  all families was less than 25%, so that the condition of the stand  in  the  study  site  could  be  categorized  as  low damaged.  The resistance  level was  resistant to  termite attacks. 3.2.4. Stem Rot There was stem rot disease on seedlings of E. pellita. The attack starting from the lower leaf towards the top of the  stem, the  affected leaves are brown and wilted, the affected part of the stem is brown, and there are fine white threads  of hyphae; the  stems and leaves are  still reddish-green,  visible  the  boundary  between  healthy bark and  the sick.  The cause is  a fungus Fusarium  sp. The conidia consist of macroconidia, curved, bulkhead, long with narrowing tips.  In contrast, microconidia  are oval  with  one  or  without  bulkhead,  and  their  size  is much smaller than the macroconidia. According  to  Stevens  [18],  the  genera  Fusarium consists of many species and many synonyms, of which around 400 species are recognized, which are primarily parasitic in plants and very harmful. The infected parts mostly were transport vessels which caused leaf wilting, Advances in Biological Sciences Research, volume 11189
    while other  species gave rise to  leaf rot, leaf  blotches, the canker of the stem, and many more. If it does not get the host, the species lives saprophytically; then, it turns into a parasite if it gets a suitable host and vulnerable. In  E.  pellita,  Fusarium  spp.  has  been  known  to attack seed, both while still in trees, in storage, and on germinating seed [19]. In Argentina, Fusarium sp. often cause damping-off on  Eucalyptus spp. seedlings in the nursery [20]. Fusarium sp. is also reported as a cause of damage  to  rubber  sheets  that  have  not  yet  been processed in Bangladesh [21]. 3.3. Insect Pest in the Nursery 3.3.1. Leaf Feeder There  was  a  species  of  grasshopper  found  in  the nursery of E. pellita at Surya Hutani Jaya Company. It was  Atractomorpha  crenulata.  The  characteristics  are same as  described by  Radhakrishnan and  Rajan (n.d.); Inflibnet Centre (n.d.) among others the body long and slender,  green,  head  conical  rarely  longer  than  the pronotum,  fastigium  as  long as  the  eye, frontal  ridge compressed  between  the  antennae,  antennae  short transurethral,  sulfiliform,  eyes  oblong,  abdomen smooth, legs long and slender.  At  the  nursery  of  Surya  Hutani  Jaya  Company, symptoms of A. crenulata attack are the presence of bite marks on young leaves of E. pellita seedlings which are irregular in shape and starting from the edge of the leaf. According to Lakitan [22] one of the functions of leaves is  the  place  where  photosynthesis  occurs,  leaves  of plants  contain  lots of  carbohydrates  or photosynthetic food  reserves,  so  pests  generally  like  to  eat  leaves, especially young ones. This grasshopper on E. pellita in the  nursery  did  not  cause  much  damage  because  the number of individuals was relatively small. The grasshopper nibble leaf lamina causing irregular holes. Most species feed on grass. Some species feed on other vegetation, including leaves and stems, even feed on  dead  Eucalyptus  leaves.  Under  some  conditions, some  species  will  migrate  in  a  dense  swarms  form, known as locusts, bringing  considerable damage  to the crop  (Inflibnet  Centre,  n.d.).  The  grasshopper  A. crenulata  preferred  Daucus  carota,  Adiantum caudatum,  and  Hemartheria  compressa  the  most amongst  13  plant  species  [23].  This  grasshopper  is found in many East Java districts on mung bean gardens but in  low abundance [24].  It is a highly  polyphagous pest with a vast range of host plants, both cultivated and wild  (Eagri,  n.d.).  This  species  (also  called  tobacco grasshopper)  has many  hosts; almost  all plant  species become their hosts, ranging from crops and plantations to forestry [25]. The distribution is in India, Myanmar, Bangladesh,  Indonesia, Sri  Lanka, and  South Vietnam [26]. 3.3.2. Leaf Roller Caterpillars of the leaf roller feed on the leaves and buds of  the seedlings.  A protective shelter  from which the leaf roller feeds make up of combined silken threads and  foliage. The  caterpillar constructs  several shelters and  sometimes,  it  is  found  more  than  one  leaf  roller within an assemblage of the webbed leaf. Insect shelters inside the leaf  roll, feeding  on the  plant tissue  within. The attacked leaves  become skeletonized  and die. The causal  leaf  roller  is  a  caterpillar  Strepsicrates macropetana. In  the  nursery  of  E. pellita  at  the  study  site, this caterpillar  was  not  caused  extensive  damage.  Still, according to Mauchline et al. [27], it has become a pest of  increasing economic  importance  to young  eucalypt plantations in New  Zealand, and  Nuttall [28]  recorded the caterpillar S. macropetana has been found on at least fifteen Eucalyptus species (Myrtaceae) in New Zealand, including  E.  botryoides,  E.  fastigata,  E.  nitens,  E. obliqua,  E.  regnans  and  E.  saligna.  This  caterpillar feeds primarily on juvenile foliage, but older leaves may also be attacked. Its larva forms damaging life stage by feeding on the shoot tips, buds, and developing flowers, which are adhered together with webbing [29]. 3.3.3. Potentialy Detrimental Pathogen A  potentially  harmful  disease  is  the  trees  in  the progeny test,  while in the nursery,  there is  no problem with  the  disease  because  the company  has  conducted intensive  supervision.  In  the  progeny  test,  dieback disease was due to  Ganoderma sp. and Botryosphaeria sp.  resulting  in  deterioration  of  canopy  function, especially for photosynthesis, so that the tree eventually dies. The causal agent of stem canker disease was just one species, namely Coryneum sp. Although just found one species  of  pathogen,  this  fungus  is  potentially detrimental  because it  damages the  stem of  E. pellita, where the  end product  of the  plantation is wood.  The stem canker will reduce the economic value of the stem.  Pathogen attacks on roots of trees can cause losses in the  future  because  they  can  interfere  with  the translocation process to reduce the  wood production of E.  pellita.  The  function  of  the  plant’s  roots  is  as  an organ to absorb nutrients and minerals from the soil and is  transported  to  other  parts  of  the  plant  through  the transport  network.  If  the  E.  pellita plant’s  root  is disturbed by the  pathogen’s infection, the translocation process will be inhibited so that the plant will die.  The species of termite found in the progeny test was just one,  namely Coptotermes sp.  Although there were only  nine families  of trees  attacked  by the  termite,  it caused physical damage directly to E. pellita and caused a  decrease  in  wood  production,  causing  economic Advances in Biological Sciences Research, volume 11190
    losses.  This  is  because  these  termites  can  attack  the roots  and  stems  of  E.  pellita  plants  so  that  the translocation  of  water  and  nutrients  from  the  soil  is disturbed, and eventually, the plants die. The cause of  stem rot  in the nursery was found  in just one fungus species, namely Fusarium sp. The pest found were two species, grasshoppers (A. crenulata) and leaf roller caterpillars (Strepsicrates sp.). All species of pathogens mentioned above found in the progeny test and the nursery are potentially harmful if  eradication  is  not  carried  out  early.  Moreover, monoculture  planting  conducted  in  the  field  may become  susceptible  to  disease  if  it  comes  from susceptible parents. This is where it is vital to establish a progeny test to  get  a superior  parent, both  superior in growth and superior in its resistance to disease. 4. CONCLUSION There  were  four  diseases  in  plantation,  namely dieback  disease,  stem  canker,  root  rot,  and  termite attack, while in  the nursery, there were three  diseases, namely damping-off, leaf feeders, and leaf roller. They were potentially detrimental diseases if supervision and care are lacking attention. At the progeny test, the area and trees were deliberately not maintained to determine the  tree’s  resistance  to  disease.  But  the  trees  in  the progeny  test and  seedlings in  the nursery  damage  the disease is not too extensive. Based on the severity of the attack,  the  following  families  are  categorized  as resistant, Ep1, Ep2, Ep7, Ep16, Ep20, Ep22, and Ep30. The  trees  of  these  families  were  utterly  free  from disease infection. Progeny test stand was just six years old  when this  study was  conducted;  therefore,  further research  was needed  until the  trees were old,  so  trees were found to be resistant to the disease.